Project Gutenberg's Some Experiments concerning Mercury, by J. H. Boerhaave

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Some Experiments concerning Mercury

Author: J. H. Boerhaave

Release Date: September 27, 2020 [EBook #63318]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)










                             [Illustration]

                                  SOME

                               EXPERIMENTS

                               CONCERNING

                               _MERCURY_.

                             [Illustration]

                          [Price One Shilling.]




                                  SOME

                               EXPERIMENTS

                               CONCERNING

                               _MERCURY_.

                     _By J. H. BOERHAAVE, Professor
                         of Physick at LEYDEN._

            Translated from the _Latin_, communicated by the
                      Author to the ROYAL SOCIETY.

                             [Illustration]

                                _LONDON_:

             Printed for J. ROBERTS, near the _Oxford-Arms_,
                      in _Warwick-Lane_. MDCCXXXIV.




[Illustration]




SOME EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING _MERCURY_.


They who by Experiments have most diligently enquired into the Origin
of Bodies, and their peculiar Powers and Properties, are the only Men
who have discovered sure Methods of acquiring a true Knowledge of
these Things: And whenever the Lovers of natural Knowledge enumerate
the Instruments of this Science, they universally agree that Chemistry
has done the greatest Service, in most industriously promoting such
Discoveries: And when they come carefully to examine the most celebrated
Writers in this Art, they plainly perceive, that the most ancient
Alchemists far surpassed the rest in their Accounts of the Nature of
Things. Of this _Geber_ is an Instance, and the Writers nearest to him;
for they are content to describe, in the plainest manner, such Things
only as they had discovered by their Art; to improve which was their
great Application, having no other Design in view. And indeed no other
Men whatever have so strictly and obstinately labour’d in the Search
after natural Things, or have taken such great Pains to turn Matter,
thro’ all the various Modes of Enquiry, as the Alchemists. This is what
will be readily granted by all those who read the Hermetic Writers,
when they openly relate common Discoveries: But, on the contrary, when
these Writers treat of the Grand _Arcanum_ (or Secret of the Wise) they
are accused of making a bad Use of their Knowledge, out of a Desire to
conceal it, as if they intended, on that Occasion, not to be understood.
They are said to deal in Paradoxes, to write in a strange manner,
perfectly foreign to all that is known, and their Style is swell’d with
hyperbolical and sublime Expressions; which makes them be exploded as
Men out of their Senses, fabulous, false, and Liars: For whilst they
affect to write in the gravest Terms, and are rich in Promises, they so
cover the Thing they are treating of in Obscurity and Darkness, that
they seem unwilling the Secret should be reveal’d. And on this account
it is, that very many wise Men are of Opinion, that what the Alchemists
promise, is a Thing impossible both to Nature and Art, and therefore
count them unworthy the Perusal of Philosophers, as well as undeserving
of the Name. But it is a Maxim, That it is safer to credit an Artist in
his own Art, than one that is an utter Stranger to it; and consequently
it is rash to condemn what the Alchemists have defined to be possible;
especially, since these Chemists openly declare, that their Writings
are to be weighed in the Balance of the most certain Laws of Nature,
which have been discovered with the greatest Evidence by the Events of
Things; (that is, by exact and repeated Experiments) and they desire not
to be credited, whenever they produce any Thing contrary to the Powers
of Nature truly known by Experiments. Moreover they alledge, that they
express themselves in such an obscure manner, only to keep profane
Persons away from their Mysteries, which are unfolded to such as are
initiated in them; and so that it was necessary that Things strange,
obscure, and often false, should be mixed and interpolated with what is
sincere, clear, and true in their Writings.

For my part, upon looking into chemical Matters, and perusing the
Writings of the Alchemists, I have found them all of the same Mind and
Meaning as to the following Particulars: That Metals are naturally
generated in their Veins, are nourished, grow, and multiply like other
natural Things, each in their proper Place: That the Aliments or
Nourishment of Metals, which before are of a foreign Nature to them,
are, by the genital Power of the Metallic Seed, converted into a truly
Metallic Nature; so that by this seminal Power alone they lose their
former, and receive a new Property by the sole cherishing of the
pregnant Warmth; for they will have all these Things to be effected
entirely by the same Means: That as the Seeds of Animals and Plants
change the Aliments they receive into their own Nourishment, so the
vivificating Seed of growing Gold, having got a proper Food, in a fit
Matrix, by the Help of a suitable and convenient Heat, digests the same
into its own particular Nature: Therefore by that Means, according to a
Law prescribed to subterraneous Things, they determine that true Gold
is always produced by Length of Time out of a Matter of a different
Nature from Gold: For having subdued its Aliment by its own Force, it
grows, by vital Increase, into a Matter like to it, so long as those four
Conditions that are absolutely required attend it. Upon pursuing their
Researches into Nature with more Accuracy, they discovered that the
Metals which are produced, and especially Gold, are very closely confined
within a very solid and pure Stone, which is on every Side so very
carefully closed up, that no Passage leading to or from the Metal can be
discerned. The Matrix of the growing Metal is thick, hard, impenetrable,
without Mixture, closed up on all Parts, and resembles Glass. There is
nothing more hard to understand, than to discern the Manner how the
solid Substance of the Metal could penetrate or force itself thro’ the
ponderous Mass of the hard Stone, into the Veins that are found pregnant
with Metal and loaded with it. Nor is it less difficult to conceive by
what Way the same Metal secretly passes into those concealed Places, if
it was liquid in its first Origin, as it is highly probable that it was.
And thus the genuine Matrix of Metal is known; the Heat of the Metallic
Mines is also known: It seldom equals the Warmth of a Man in Health,
but often sinks below the 66ᵗʰ Degree in the Scale of _Farenheitius_’s
Thermometer. Hence they who are versed in these Mysteries direct, That
the breeding Matter of the _Arcanum_ should be inclosed in a pure Glass
Vessel, and cherish’d with a _Majal Heat_; which we find, by Experience,
to be of 50 Degrees. And this has been found out to be at a Medium
throughout the Year, by the most exact Observations; which we owe to the
industrious Care of _Cruquius_. The Food of the Metal remains yet more
obscure as to what is that seminal, proliferous and genital Matter. Most
of these Philosophers say, That Quicksilver is the common Matter of all
Metals: That this being changed by the Power of the vital Seed, gives a
Metal which is defined or determined according to the peculiar Property
of the seminal Efficacy: That every Metal, when the Quicksilver and
this Metallific Power (which they call Sulphur) are maturely and, as it
were, thoroughly boil’d and concocted, is brought to a perfect Species of
each such Metal. And from hence, That every Metal is again resolved into
these two Principles, Mercury and Sulphur. But that there is an original
Flaw or Blemish inherent in Quicksilver from its first Production, that
wonderfully grows up with it, and is intimately concreted to it, and
therefore not without the greatest Difficulty to be separated from it;
and consequently the Quicksilver wou’d not be very simple, nor free,
but is by that strange Matter inherent in it, of a definite Nature, and
therefore wou’d hardly suffer itself to be obsequious to the particular
Virtue of the Metallic Seed, and be drawn into the single Nature of one
Metal: But if by a most difficult Art, the Quicksilver be thoroughly
purged of that foreign Blemish or Foulness, then it would become liquid,
metallic, most weighty, and most simple; neither by any Art or Nature
divisible into different Things; and in which the vivified Seed of every
dissolved Metal wou’d most perfectly multiply itself; in which the Gold
itself dissolving, being cherish’d and maturated, wou’d be the last so
much sought for, and so much celebrated Reward of the Labour.

When I found that the chief Persons of the Art agreed in these Principles
for a long Time, I have endeavour’d to learn by Experience, by what
Artifice a pure unmix’d Mercury might be obtained? Whether it cou’d be
extracted out of Metals? What is that other Part of the Metal that is apt
to force under its Yoak the free Quicksilver, or Mercury? I am glad to
give an Account of what I have discovered; not that I pretend to teach
the Art, which I am as far from as any one; but I will faithfully relate
some laborious Experiments, and which are so very certain, that they
may justly pass for true. Others will not need to repeat them, but may
safely make use of these as true upon Occasion. And a diligent Artist,
by assuming (or supposing) these Experiments, may apply his Mind farther
to others, in order to promote the Study of Chemistry the more. It were
to be wish’d, that every Man directed his private Labours to the public
Good. Let the first Experiment be this:




EXPERIMENT I.

    _Pure Quicksilver contain’d in a dry Glass Vessel that is
    very clean, being agitated only by a mechanical Shaking or
    Concussion, gives a soft, black, and very fine Powder._


_The Operation._

Having bought 16 Ounces of Quicksilver of the Company at _Amsterdam_, I
strain’d it thro’ a Leather Bag; there remain’d no Dregs: I pounded it a
long while with fair Water: The Quicksilver remained pure after pounding:
It was then a long time pounded with Sea-Salt, but the Colour of the
Salt was not fouled: after having poured Water to this Salt, and to the
Mercury, the pounding was repeated; but neither did this change the
Colour. In all this Work there appeared nothing black, nothing foreign or
foul. Then the Quicksilver was washed and dried, and was bright. I poured
it into a clean dry Glass Bottle, made of the dark-green _German_ Glass.
At the same Time I plac’d it in a Sand Furnace, with a Fire that almost
made the Mercury rise; and to be sure that all the Water was forced out,
which is often secretly present in the Mercury, I kept it thus for three
Days: Then having thrust a clean dry strong Cork into the Mouth of the
Vessel whilst it was yet warm, I fasten’d it up as close as possible. The
Head of the Bottle thus closed with a Cork, I dipt into a liquid Cement
of Pitch, Rosin, Tallow, and Brimstone, and covered it over with a Linnen
Cloth, which I tied fast with Packthread. When the Glass was thus made
ready, I put it in a small Wooden Box, which was so fitted to the Bottle,
that it touched the Sides of it; and the empty Spaces between the Bottle
and the Box, were well filled with Bran. Then I put on a Cover, with a
Hole bored in the Middle, for the Top of the Neck of the Bottle to stand
a little out. The Glass was immoveable in the Box; and it being thus
prepared, I had it fastened to the Hammering Block of a Fulling-Mill,
which always moves Night and Day when there is any Wind. Being thus
fixed, it was rais’d up and let down by a perpendicular Motion, from the
1st of _March_, 1732. _N. S._ to the 13ᵗʰ of _November_ of the same Year.


_The Effect._

The Bottle being opened, there was the same Weight of Mercury, which was
covered on all Sides with a very soft, black, copious and fine Powder. I
squeez’d it thro’ a clean Leather Bag; the liquid and pure Mercury pass’d
thro’. The Powder remained in the Bag of a sharp metallic Taste, somewhat
resembling the Taste of Copper or Brass.


COROLLARIES.

1. Quicksilver, in itself very insipid, by meer shaking, acquires a
metallic Taste of Copper.

2. From being very mild, it becomes sharp and penetrating.

3. From a very bright Silver Colour, it turns very black.

4. From a Fluid, it becomes Solid in the Form of Powder.

5. It may therefore be concealed under the Appearance of such a Powder,
and deceive the Ignorant.




EXPERIMENT II.

    _Quicksilver exceedingly well purified, and treated as
    aforesaid (EXPER. 1.) gives the same Powder in much greater
    Plenty._


_The Operation._

I suspecting that something of a foreign Nature to it might remain in
the Quicksilver, and be separated from it, by Motion, under the Form
of that Powder, I brought over all the Mercury in a Glass Retort with a
Sand-Heat. When it was all over, I pour’d it again into the same Retort,
and forc’d it by Fire, as before. This Method I repeated 60 times. The
Mercury was thus distilled 61 times. In the Bottom of the Vessel there
were five Drachms of Red Powder; of which hereafter. But this Mercury was
very fluid and shining. I got 2 Ounces of this Mercury to be shaken by a
Fulling-Mill in the same Manner, and by the same Operation, and for the
same Space of Time as in the first Operation.


_The Effect._

The Weight was the same: There was a Powder made, soft, black, of a sharp
metallic Taste, like Copper or Brass, to the Quantity of 2 Drachms and 26
Grains: So it was above an eighth Part; whereas of the Mercury, as they
sell it, scarce ¹⁄₁₂₈ Part was turn’d into Powder by the same Operations;
that is, by the shaking of the Mill.


COROLLARIES.

1. The Mercury, which after being distilled 61 times, yet remained very
tasteless and insipid, acquires a metallic Taste.

2. From being very mild, grows sharp and penetrating.

3. From having a bright Silver Colour, and shining like a Looking-Glass,
becomes very black.

4. From being more fluid than it was naturally, comes to a consistent
Powder.

5. Tho’ forced by a long and strong Fire, so often repeated, the Mercury
still retains this Property (of Fluidity).

6. Which therefore does not depend on any Feces or Dregs foreign to the
Mercury, and that may be separated from it by Fire.

7. The Matter which, after the Distillation of the Mercury, remain’d
in the Bottom of the Retort, red, shining, and sharp, is no more like
the black Powder proceeding from the Shaking, than that Part is of the
Mercury, which remained volatile.

8. Mercury is changed by Fire and Shaking; by Fire into red, by Shaking
into black: Therefore Mercury changes Colour.

9. Whether Mercury shaken in a smaller Quantity, gives more of the black?
(Powder)




EXPERIMENT III.

    _The very black Powder (by EXPERIM. 2.) if it is forced out of
    a Glass Retort by a strong Fire, returns to pure Quicksilver._


_The Operation._

The 2 Drachms and 26 Grains of the black Powder (by _Operat. 2._) I
heated by a strong Fire, and forced out of a pure Glass Retort, insomuch,
that at last the Retort was red hot for 2 Hours.


_The Effect._

There were in the Receiver 2 Drachms and 2 Grains of the purest
Quicksilver, insipid and shining. There stuck to the Sides of the Glass,
which being join’d to the Retort, is luted to a Receiver full of Water,
a little Quicksilver here and there, which I could not entirely gather
together. In the Bottom of the Retort was a fix’d Spot, small, very thin
and fine, and but just visible.


COROLLARIES.

1. Mercury, that has been 61 times distilled and shaken, and turned into
the afore described Powder, returns by Fire alone into its first Form.

2. Of sharp and penetrating, it becomes very mild.

3. Of very black, it comes to resemble pure Looking-Glass, with a Silver
Brightness.

4. Of a consistent Powder, it becomes very fluid.

5. In these three Operations it remains the same in itself; in the mean
time it alters its Appearance under various Disguises.

6. The Taste and sharp Power are wonderfully changed in the Mercury, by
Motion alone, by Fire alone.

7. In the mean time there arises, from these Operations, out of the
Quicksilver, a small Quantity of fix’d Mercury.

8. The black (Spot) was no Dreg, or any Thing foreign, and so separated
from the Mercury.


SCHOLIUM.

I exposed to a Fire of 180 Degrees, for several Months, some Quicksilver
in Glass Conic Vessels, with flat Bottoms, that were stopt with a
chemical inverted Phial: The Quicksilver became black, and gave a black
Powder, in all respects alike; from which I learnt, that a Fire in this
Degree, produced the same Effect in the Quicksilver as the shaking.




EXPERIMENT IV.

    _Quicksilver is changed by simple Distillation._


_The Operation._

18 Ounces of Quicksilver, Weight of _Amsterdam_, I forced by a
Sand-Heat, out of a pure Glass Retort, into the Receiver that was filled
with the purest Water, 4 Inches high from the Bottom: This I continued
to do till there was no more running Mercury left in the Belly of the
Vessel. I dried and cleaned the Mercury with clean dry blotting Paper,
till it was perfectly dry, cleaned from any Dirt that might have fallen
in, and from the Black which in distilling is raised every time with
the Mercury as it distills: Then I poured this Mercury into another
Retort, and forced it again as before. This I repeated in the same manner
52 times. In each Distillation there was produced in the Retort a red
shining Powder.


_The Effect._

There was then four Drams and a half after 52 Distillations of a sharp,
red, shining Powder, purging upwards and downwards: There remained 16
Ounces and 5 Drachms of Quicksilver; so 6½ Drachms were lost. This could
not be help’d. Some part expires thro’ the Glew; something black, with a
little Quicksilver, sticks to the Blotting-Paper every time the Mercury
is dried. This is but very little at one time; but when the Work comes
to be often repeated, it comes by Degrees to be a considerable part. The
Powder produced was heavy, of a red shining Colour, very brittle, of a
very sharp, metallic Taste, nauseous, penetrating, hardly to be taken out
of the Mouth, disordering the Human Body very much, and for a long time,
and disposing to Excretions. The Mercury which had been thus treated,
appeared more fluid than common Mercury.


COROLLARIES.

1. Quicksilver thus forced by Fire, is turned from a Fluid into Powder,
in about the ¹⁄₂₈ part of its whole Weight.

2. From a Silver Brightness, like Looking-Glass, into a shining red
Colour.

3. From very insipid Taste, into one very sharp, rough, metallic, and
penetrating.

4. From very mild, into sharp, virulent, venomous, disordering the Body,
and exciting Pains.

5. From volatile into more fixed; which is no longer volatile by the same
Degree of Fire as it flew up with before.

6. As to its other part, it changes into more fluid, in other respects
like what it was before.

7. When the Vessel is stopt close, a mechanic Motion, and a small Fire,
give Quicksilver a black Colour; a greater Fire gives it a red Colour.




EXPERIMENT V.

    _I was desirous to know what would happen to the Mercury, if it
    was still forced by a Fire requisite to Distillation._


_The Operation._

I took care to distill, as before, the 16 Ounces and 5 Drachms of Mercury
remaining from the former Operation: I distill’d it so long, ’till
there remained none in the Bottom. What was came over, being cleaned and
dried, I always poured again into the same Retort. This Work I repeated
448 distinct times. Now this Mercury had been forced by Distillation
compleatly 500 times: It had risen always more fluid and pure. The last
time I heated the Fire more, but then the red Powder seem’d rather to be
lessened than increased, perhaps being in part revived.


_The Effect._

The Powder in the bottom of the Retort, weigh’d 1 Ounce, 5 Drams, and 21
Grains. The Mercury remaining after 500 Distillations, weighed 9 Ounces
and 5 Drachms: But it happen’d, in so often distilling, that sometimes
the Retorts broke, and so some of the Mercury got away, besides what was
lost by so often cleaning and drying.


COROLLARIES.

1. The Corollaries of the second and fourth Operations, are likewise true
in this Operation.

2. The Mercury is very unchangeable in one part,

3. Yet continually changeable in the other part.

4. Out of the altered Form, perhaps it returns into its former Shape.

5. And perhaps after Regeneration by a new Action of Fire, it is carried
back again into the altered Shape.




EXPERIMENT VI.

    _That Property of Quicksilver, by which it is turned into this
    Powder by Fire, is hardly taken from it by Distillation._


_The Operation._

The very fluid and very pure Mercury (out of which I had made by 501
Distillations, 2 Ounces, 1 Drachm, and 51 Grains of Powder, by the 2ᵈ,
4ᵗʰ, and 5ᵗʰ Operations) which remained to the Quantity of 10 Ounces, 5
Drachms, and one half, I distilled out of a pure Glass Retort, till the
Mercury was all passed thro’ into the Receiver. The Bottom of the Retort
was as clean as if it had been just taken out of the Furnace at the
Glass-House: But at the Edge of the Surface, where it had stood before
the Distillation in the Belly of the Retort, there was a shining Ring,
of a beautiful red, fine and fair to the Eye. The Mercury that came out,
being purified and dried, I poured again into the same Retort, and forced
it into the Receiver. This was repeated ten times: Every time more of the
red Powder was made, and in no less Quantity then from the crude Mercury.


_The Effect._

The Mercury very vivid and very bright; the fix’d Powder of a beautiful
red, but (as in 2ᵈ, 4ᵗʰ, 5ᵗʰ Operations) to the Quantity of seven Grains.


COROLLARIES.

1. The Mutability of Mercury into this Powder by Fire, still remains in
the Mercury, after an eighth part of it has been changed into the Powder.

2. After 511 Distillations, each of which had produced some of that
Powder, this Mutability remains, altho’ no new Mercury has been added.

3. Therefore that Powder is scarce to be accounted the Dregs or Feces
separable by Distillation from the intimate Substance of the Mercury.

4. And hence it is certain the Mercury is so changed by this Means; but
it is not certain that it is by this Means defecated.

5. Fire is not united to Mercury, as some celebrated modern Chemists have
said it was, in their Writings.

6. Diligence can scarce teach the constant Artists those Bounds beyond
which that Powder is no longer produced.

7. If that Powder is produced by Fire out of the crude Sulphur of
Mercury, this Distillation does not purge the Mercury from it.




EXPERIMENT VII.

    _To examine the Powder produced by 2ᵈ, 4ᵗʰ, 5ᵗʰ, 6ᵗʰ
    Operations._


_The Operation._

Two Ounces, 1 Drachm, and 51 Grains of that Powder, I put into a clean
Glass Retort, covered with a Coat of Clay, mix’d or temper’d with Sand. I
heated it by Degrees, till at last the Retort, the bare Fire being laid
over it, grew almost red with the bright Fire that covered it in the Sand
Furnace, for three Hours together.


_The Effect._

There came out 1 Ounce, and half a Drachm of pure Mercury revived from
that Powder: There remain’d in the Bottom of the Retort seven Drachms
and a half of the bright red Powder. Something stuck in the Neck of
the Retort, and in the Glass Vessel applied to the Neck of the Retort.
Perhaps some was dissipated by so great and lasting a Fire.


COROLLARIES.

1. The Mercury returns out of the Powder into which it was turned by the
Fire.

2. Being revived, it recovers all its former Properties, and lays aside
all those that it had acquir’d. Out of the Powder comes the same Mercury
as at first.

3. The acquired Fixedness does not bear a great Fire.

4. Yet in that Powder one part is more fixed than another; this still
remains a Powder, that returns to Mercury.




EXPERIMENT VIII.

    _Further to examine the Powder remaining after the foregoing
    Operation._


_The Operation._

Seven Drachms and 37 Grains of that Powder in a very clean Glass Retort,
cased over with a Coat of Sand and Clay, I put into the naked Fire, which
was carefully increased by Degrees, ’till the little Retort, which was
entirely covered with the Coals, grew quite red hot. In this Degree of
Heat I kept it for four Hours.


_The Effect._

In the Receiver was seven Drams of most pure Mercury reviv’d from this
Powder. In the Bottom of the Retort were 15 Grains of a dark, subtle, and
fixed Powder, in so strong and lasting a Fire. There was a broad Spot,
very thin, of a beautiful red, impressed on the Bottom of the Retort,
and, as it were, penetrating into the Glass.


COROLLARIES.

1. Mercury by Fire alone is changed into the Powder above describ’d. (2,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8.)

2. This Powder, by Fire alone, but a stronger, is changed into Mercury.

3. Thus the Serpent that has bitten itself dies.

4. It arises again more glorious from Death.

5. So much Labour, and so great Fire being so long sustain’d, out of 17
Ounces of Mercury, only 15 Grains remain’d fix’d in the Glass, which was
so hot, that it was ready to melt.

6. Silver, Gold, and other Metals fought for by this Art out of
Quicksilver, is scarce any, in Proportion to the Charge and Labour.

7. Of the Powder so fix’d from Mercury, only the 72ᵈ Part remains fix’d
in this Fire, the rest returns to Mercury.

8. Twenty-two Grains were lost. Were they dispers’d? or was this Quantity
of Weight first accreted to the Mercury by Fire, thence again separated
by a stronger Fire?

9. The Nature of Mercury is constant, simple, and cannot be separated
into dissimilar Parts by Distillation; not into fix’d and volatile; not
into pure and impure; not into feces and defecated; not into different
Elements.




EXPERIMENT IX.

    _I put thirteen Grains of this last fix’d Powder (VIII.) into
    a Crucible, and set it over an open Fire before the Bellows:
    I increas’d the Heat of the Fire, by blowing till the whole
    Crucible was red hot: I kept it so for a Quarter of an Hour.
    The Powder remain’d fix’d in the Bottom, but swell’d up like a
    Spunge, and of a dark Colour. From hence I learn’d that this
    Powder had acquired a considerable Degree of Fixedness by Fire
    alone._




EXPERIMENT X.

    _Then I added to this fix’d Powder (IX.) some Borax in a
    Crucible, and increased the Fire by blowing. It became one
    Mass, brittle, growing like Glass, and fix’d in this great
    Fire._




EXPERIMENT XI.

    _I gave 2 Grains of that Powder, which had remained fix’d, to
    the Weight of 15 Grains (VIII.) to a sworn and very skilful
    Essayer of Metals at AMSTERDAM, to examine it with all possible
    Accuracy according to the Rules of Art, with Lead. Nothing
    fix’d remain’d: Therefore in that Powder there was not the
    least Gold or Silver._




EXPERIMENT XII.

    _The thirteen Grains melted down with the Borax into a Mass
    growing like Glass (almost vitrified) (X.) I gave to a sworn
    and very skilful Essayer of Metals at AMSTERDAM, to examine
    this whole little Mass with the greatest Accuracy, according to
    the Rules of Art, in Lead. Nothing fix’d remain’d of the whole
    Mass; so there was no Gold nor Silver in it._


COROLLARIES.

1. Quicksilver persists in the Fire, retaining its Nature unalterable.

2. Simple, and not separable, into different Parts by Distillation.

3. It is fixed by Fire, and seems changed in its outward Form.

4. Appearing so, in various Parts, it acquires different Degrees of
Fixedness.

5. Yet none of these Parts acquired, by so strong and lasting a Fire, the
Fixedness of Gold or Silver.

6. The fixating Cause is Fire passing thro’ the Glass; thus changing part
of the Mercury, either by its simple Action, or by its uniting itself
with the Quicksilver.

7. The Fire so acting, by 511 Distillations, by its Action or
Conjunction, could not yet change the smallest Particle of the Mercury
into Gold or Silver.

8. But from the Mercury so fixed by Fire, a greater Fire restores true
Mercury; or the known Power of Lead makes it vanish out of the Cupell.

9. Therefore it does not appear, by these Experiments, that from Mercury
and Fire so conspiring, any known Metal is produced. Those 13 Grains did
not run by a Wind-Furnace; they did not persist in the Lead; they were
not dissolved with the Mercury into an Amalgama.

10. Therefore Fire, by these Experiments, is not demonstrated to be the
Sulphur of the Philosophers that fixes Mercury into Metals.

11. But it seems probable that the Sulphur of the Philosophers is
something else very near it.

12. The fixed part is not the Feces of Mercury, nor its crude generating
Sulphur; it returns into Mercury.

13. The Depuration of Mercury from the earthy Feces, and the watry
Crudeness, seems scarcely to be obtained so easily by Distillation alone;
perhaps by some more secret Work it is obtain’d.

14. To make Gold or Silver of Mercury, does not proceed. Ignorant Men are
given up to Imagination, easy to Promises, rich in Hope. This Mercury
remained Mercury.

15. Safe from the fallacious Writings and Prescriptions of the
Philosophers, who promise such Things in a short Time, or a few Months
from Mercury and Fire: Indeed, within the Space of many Years, I have not
discovered the least Marks of a first beginning.




EXPERIMENT XIII.

    _Mercury kept under boiling Water, is not rais’d from the
    Bottom of the Vessel._


_The Operation._

I pour’d a Drachm of Mercury twice distilled into a Glass Urinal, which
I fill’d with Rain Water: Then I set the Vessel upon the naked Fire: The
Water boil’d strongly for eight Hours, yet so that there still was some
Water swimming over the Mercury. The Mercury being afterwards weigh’d,
gave a Drachm without any Loss.

Again; I pour’d a Drachm of Mercury into a clean dry Glass Vessel. This
I so fitted in a Kettle, that it cou’d not fall aside. I filled the
Kettle with Water; I made the Water boil eight Hours. This Vessel was
cylindrical, open, two Inches and one half deep, and placed so that the
Water cou’d not get in. After this was so done, the Mercury weighed one
Drachm without any Loss.

I put pure Mercury into a Glass Vessel, I poured Water upon it; and
setting the Still over it, I boil’d it for a long while: No Mercury
ascended. I continued boiling, till all the Water being gone out, the
Mercury remained dry in the Bottom of the Vessel. However, I did not then
increase the Fire; but the Mercury presently ascended to the Sides of the
Vessel, and into the Head. The Reason of this appears from what I have
written in my chemical Institutions about Water and Fire.




EXPERIMENT XIV.

    _Mercury may be chang’d by Art so as that it shall ascend from
    the Bottom of the Vessel, by the Heat of Vinegar, before it
    boils up._


_The Operation._

Having made a Mass of a Pound and a half of Mercury, with half a Pound of
Lead (the Chemists call such a Mass an Amalgama) I shook it in a Glass
Vessel. There was produced a very black Powder. This I put into a Glass
Cucurbite 14 Inches high; I pour’d pure distill’d Wine-Vinegar over it.
By a gentle Distillation I took away the Phlegm. I then increased the
Heat a little, but so that the Liquor did not boil. The Mercury ascended
into the Head, together with the Phlegm, and thence into the Receiver.
The same I tried and experienced other Ways. It is a Circumstance worthy
a Chemist’s Speculation; but I shall say no more of it here. By much the
like Artifice, I have seen Quicksilver made so volatile, that it was
rais’d in my Digestory-Furnace with a less Degree of Heat, than that of
a Man in Health, and ascended to the Sides of the Vessel. Do you think
the Mercury was then purer? It was mix’d with Metal, and very dry. But
perhaps I may some other time relate some very laborious Experiments
which I have made for several Years, in examining Mercury and Metals, if
I find that such Things are likely to meet with the Approbation of the
Learned.




EXPERIMENT XV.

    _GEBER has written, that pure Mercury is heavier than Gold:
    For a long time I endeavour’d to learn, Whether Mercury could
    be brought to a denser, and consequently a heavier State,
    than that it is naturally in? I began to attempt this by a
    Separation of the lighter and more changeable Part, from the
    more heavy Remainder, but cou’d not do it. I afterwards strove
    to defecate it by various Methods: It did not succeed. However,
    I discovered some Things that deserve the Contemplation
    of curious Observers, which I beg leave to mention, as
    follows: Two Ounces of pure Gold in a Mass, by hydrostatical
    Examination, in Rain-Water, defecated by gentle Distillation,
    I found to weigh in proportion to Water, as 19¹¹⁹⁄₅₀₀ to 1.
    Common Mercury, as sold, once distilled from the Retort to the
    same Water, weighs as 13⁵⁷⁄₁₀₀ to 1. Mercury amalgamated with
    purest Gold, and then distilled some hundred times, as 13⁵⁵⁄₁₀₀
    to 1. Mercury so treated with the purest Silver, was to Water
    as 13⁵⁷⁄₁₀₀ to 1. Mercury united with Lead, and with it all
    turn’d into Powder, and thence resuscitated by a strong Fire,
    was to Water, as 13⁵⁸⁄₁₀₀ to 1. Mercury 511 times distilled,
    was as 14¹¹⁄₁₀₀ to 1._


These Statical Weighings were made by Instruments that cou’d not be found
fault with, and with the most prudent Care. I spent some Years to prepare
Mercury for this Purpose; and, for ought I know, no one else has had any
Regard to it. Afterwards, many Things proper for Meditation may be drawn
from thence, by proper Judges in this Matter: But I may be allowed to
make a few Observations.


COROLLARIES.

1. If Mercury, when defecated, becomes lighter, then it is rendred most
defecated by Gold and Lead. By the Art of _Suchtenius_ and _Philalethes_,
it remains the same.

2. If Mercury, when defecated, becomes heavier, then it is rendred most
defecated by Silver, in proportion to other Metals; but most of all by
simple Distillation, by a Conversion into a Red Præcipitate of itself,
and a Resuscitation thence made.

3. Mercury may be made thicker (condensated) by Silver and Fire.

4. Mercury may be thickned by Distillation by Fire most of all. Is this
then the best Way to depurate and perfect it?

5. Does Mercury deposite its heaviest Part in Gold? Is this deposited
Matter the Seed of Gold?

6. Does Mercury deposite its heaviest Part in Lead? Is this deposited
Matter the Seed of Gold?

7. Does Fire, boiling the Mercury 511 times, fixing and resuscitating it,
increase that heaviest Part? Can Mercury, by a continued Work, at length
be thickned into the Weight of Gold? Would it then be live Gold, or the
Mercury of the Philosophers? This let proper Judges examine.

Let these few Remarks, and yet not made without Trouble and Caution,
concerning the Purification of Quicksilver, suffice at this time. I have
some by me much more operose concerning the extracting of Mercury out of
Metals, of its Action upon Metals, of Metals themselves; perhaps, when I
have Leisure, I may offer them to the Public, that Persons, after being
warned, may spare a fruitless Labour and Expence. _Farewell._

[Illustration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Some Experiments concerning Mercury, by 
J. H. Boerhaave

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING ***

***** This file should be named 63318-0.txt or 63318-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/3/1/63318/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
